in this video we're going to learn how to delete
a node from a
Circular Linked list
So here we have to consider three cases
The first case is when the circular linked list is empty
then deletion cannot be performed
The second case is when
The node to be deleted is the head or deletion
is to be performed at the beginning and the final
case is when the node to be deleted is any
node other than the head
So we have a circular linked list here and let
us try to delete the node
Ten first we have to check
If the list is empty then deletion is not possible
So check if head equal to null
But here it is not so check
If deletion is to be performed at the beginning that
is whether the node to be deleted is the head
node
And if the node to be deleted is the head
we have to check two cases
The first case is
There is only one node in the list and we
have to delete that node which will be the head
and the second case is
There are multiple nodes in the list and we have
to find the last node and make it a point
to the second node and finally make the second node
the head
So first check
If head is the only node and we can check
that simply because if the list is having only one
node and if it is the node to be deleted
then head dot data will be equal to key which
is true here and head dot next will be pointing
to head itself which is also draw here
So we can understand that the list is having only
one node and that is the node to be deleted
so we can just delete that node so make head
equal to null
So that was one case
Now let us see another circular linked list with three
nodes 10 20 and 30
Let us try to delete the node ten first we need
to check if the list is empty
So we have if head equal to null which is not
true so
check
If head is to be deleted and if it is
the only node in the list and here head data
equal to key but head next is not equal
to head
So it fails now chek if head is having the
key
So check If head dot data equal to key and
it is true here
So which is found out Head is not the only
node in this list
So this is the head node deletion
But there are multiple nodes in the list
So what we have to do is traverse the list
and find the last node and make last node point to
2nd node and make the second node the new head
so let us declare last initialised to head
Now use a while loop to traverse the list So
we have the condition last next not equal to head and
move last to the next node in each iteration and
when last next becomes head will have reached the last
node and the loop will be terminated
So first we have last equal to 1000 so last dot
Next will be equal to 2000 which is not equal to
head So move last to the next node So last
equal to 2000 Now Now check the condition and we
have last dot next equal to 3000 which is not
equal to head so again go in sight and move
Last to the next node
So we will get last equal to 3000 now
Now check the condition and we have last dot next
equal to 1000 which is the head
So condition fails and control comes out of the while
loop
So now we have the last node pointed by last
So the next step is to make the last node
point to 2nd node
So we have last dot next equal to head dot
next
Now we need to make this second node the new
head so we have head equal to head dot Next
So that's done
And that's how we can delete a node from the
beginning
Of the circular linked list So led us quickly revise it
So First we checked if the linked list is empty
and then we checked
If deletion is to be performed at the beginning that
is that head
So to delete from the beginning we can have two
cases deleting from a list having just one node and
from a list which is having more than one node
And if it is just one node simply make head
equal to null and if it is with multiple nodes then
we have to find the last node
Make it point to the second node and make the
second node the new head
Now let us see how to delete a node which
is not the head so let us
Delete 30 from this list
So first check
If this list is empty but it is not now
chek if Head dot data equal to Key and head
dot next equal to head but it fails
That is they are checking if head is the node
to be deleted or if it is the only node
But it fails here
So we need to check if head has the key and
it also fails here
So we need to go to the else part that
is that node to be deleted is not the head
and it could be any other node
But we don't know whether node to be deleted is
and we don't know if it is present in this
list or not
So what should we do We need to traverse the
list and check
If any node has given key so declared current pointing
to head we will start iterating from the head
till the last node
So we have the while loop while current dot next
not equal to head and then current next becomes head
we would have reach the last node and condition will fail
and loop will be terminated and we will get last
node pointed by current
So in each iteration we will check if the nodes
data equal to key
If so we have to make its previous node point
to its next node
So let us see how it works
So in first iteration current equal to head and current
next equal to 2000 and not head
So go inside and check If current next day data
equal to Key and we have current next equal to 2000
and the data at 2000 equal to 20 and not
key so the condition will fail
So skip the inner statements and move current to the
next node
So we have current equal to current dot Next
So current equal to 2000 now Now check the condition
and we have if current next not equal to head and
we have 3000 not equal to head
So the condition is okay
So go inside and check If current next data
equal to 30 and we have current next equal to
3000 and data 3000 equal to 30
So if is true and we found the key 30
is in the next node of current
That is next node of current is the node to
be deleted So right current dot next equal to current
dot next dot next and we can break out of
the loop
So that is how we delete a node other than
head
Now what if the key is not present in the
list then this while loop will be naturally is hosted
that when current next becomes head and we will check
if current next equal to head and it will be
true so we can print Key is not found that
is delete the key 40 from this list
So first check
If the list is empty it is not then check
If head is the node to be deleted and it
also fails
So we come to the else part and Travers the
list to find the node to be deleted
So in first iteration current equal to head and current
next equal to 2000 which is not head so go
inside and check if current next data equal to
key
But current next data equal to 20 and not
the key 40
So the condition will fail so that inner statements
will be skipped and current will be moved to the
next node
So we have current equal to 2000 Now Now check
the condition if current next not equal to head and
3000 is not equal to head
So the condition is okay so go inside and check
If current next data equal to
40 and current next equal to 3000 and the data
at 3000 equal to 30
So if will fail so skip the inner statements and
move current to next node So we have current equal to
3000 and now check the condition if current next not
equal to head and we have 3000 next equal to 1000
which is head so condition will fail and control will
come out of the while Loop And we have travelled
the list completely and did not find the key
So check if current next equal to head and it
is which means the key is not present so we
can print it so that is how deletion can be
performed in circlar
linked list
Now when we talk about the time complexity the best
case is when there is only one node in the list
and it is to be deleted it can be done
in constant time
So the time complexity will be order of one
Otherwise we have to search the linked list to find
the key which will take order of n time.